But all you've got is my screen share.
Okay so if you un-screen share it.
Oh god how do I?
No I...
Is it gone now?
Yep all good.
Okay well we're recording at the moment let's just take it while we share.
We'll edit that bit out.
Please do.
So let's start with the formal stuff.
So if you could just introduce yourself, tell us where you are, how old you are and the date today.
Okay so my name is Sami Vali.
I am 28 years old and I'm currently in Abergavenny at my parents house and the date is the 28th of September and we're in 2020.
And I'm Anna Sosiecki, work for Mencap Cymru and I'm at home in Cardiff.
So we have got together today to have a little chat and revisit I guess.
I know originally you did your interview with Emily.
So we will chat a bit about Emily but it would be good to kind of guess the main focuses around this last few months and how that's impacted you and particularly your friendships and relationships.
So if we start maybe by thinking back to maybe towards the end of February and the build up.
Right yeah.
What was that like for you? Can you describe the sort of run up to things?
I was really, well for me to begin with I was just, I didn't really take it seriously.
Like people around me were saying oh this is going to happen and we're going to have this worldwide thing and you know and I just thought no I don't see it myself.
And then slowly slowly things started to change and I thought hmm maybe I should start taking things more seriously but I just couldn't.
My brain wouldn't allow me to accept the change that was happening even though I knew it was going to happen and I knew I'd have to adjust.
At that moment in time because nobody seemed to panic or everybody around me seemed to panic except for me.
I was a bit like should I be panicked and I thought but then if I start panicking I'm only adding to what's already there and people would ask me why are you not panicking?
Why are you not panicked buying? I said because I don't need to.
I said I don't feel we're at that point where we need to start panicking about what's going on.
I think it really did hit me once we sort of got to start a march and they were like and everything's shut.
And it was strange it was almost like momentarily in my head the world had stopped because everything I'd strive to have and achieve in my life had almost been put on hold.
I was like I don't know what I'm going to do because I dance eight to ten hours a week.
I do loads of other things and then all of a sudden to be told you can't even go out of your local area was a real shock really.
But I mean yeah the run-up to it was strange because in my head I didn't want it to happen or in my head I didn't want it to happen as quick as it did.
And then there was like I spoke to someone who's close to me, well it was my dance teacher in fact, and she was the same.
She says I can't wrap my head around why people are panicking and I said to her maybe it's just me and you.
And we'd laugh and joke about the fact, not joke about what was going on, we'd joke about the fact that we were so laid back and the rest of the world was in this panic-stricken.
And then suddenly we just kind of went now we understand why but it's because we were just like oh when it happens it happens.
But I think people were preempting the worst before it actually happened so already people were getting anxious about what was going to happen.
Whereas naturally you'd think it would make me really anxious too but in a weird way I couldn't be anxious about something that wasn't real.
Like it hadn't happened, there was no lockdown. People around me were panicked by it yeah.
But other than that I was just like well it's kind of, to me it was almost like when you go to shops at Christmas time people are manic around you because they want to get all the pre-
To me nothing, it didn't really signal to me anything was wrong in the world at that moment in time so I was just kind of you know quite relaxed about it.
But when it hit it hit with full force then because then I was a bit like I almost felt that I didn't get any pre-warning because although other people were panicking and I wasn't and maybe I should have been.
It was kind of strange then to then suddenly be like well no it is real and then I was kind of frustrated at why I didn't accept it was real sooner because then it would have been less of a shock and less of an impact.
But just have to kind of go with it really.
Do you usually live in your own flat independently?
I do.
How has that changed then?
It's changed massively in the fact that if I'm being honest I'm currently not living at my own house, I'm living very much at my parents.
I do go to check my flat and make sure everything's alright, pick up the post, do things that sort of make to make people aware that I haven't just completely left it abandoned.
But it was more a case of when all the lockdowns came in I said to my mum I can't be on my own, I don't want you to be on your own because I had no internet.
Although I had a TV and I had people around me I had no internet and internet has become a massive part of how we communicate now so I'm like if I had been at home and there was no way of me getting to my parents I genuinely have no idea what I'd have done because other than phoning up somebody I would have been completely cut off from the world completely.
Other than the fact that people could talk to me on the phone I wouldn't be able to see them virtually because I wouldn't have, well I do have data on my phone but I wouldn't have been nowhere near enough for me to do what I do now.
And so yeah it was a bit of a shock because obviously coming down to my parents it was a bit stressful because suddenly my dad who works four days a week was suddenly working from home.
As well as myself having to keep up my men cat work and my other job because neither of them were furlough which was good in a way because it gave me something to focus on but in a way it was quite stressful because dad and I were having to make sure we were in opposite ends of the house otherwise we'd hear each other's conversation.
And it just particularly as he was having to record quite a lot of his meetings so he was like it wasn't until they played it back all they could hear was me in the background talking about my work and they were like oh dad was like well we were in different rooms of the house but the house is not majorly big in terms of even if we went upstairs and then again the internet is not great because we're the furthest away from the internet box where we live so it's kind of hit and miss as to who whose call goes because usually if two of us are on a call
at the same time one would cut the other out so it was kind of working out who's more important.
So yeah I'm hoping to go back up into my place at some point but the the fact that the world is so uncertain doesn't make me at the moment doesn't make me feel that going back is the right thing and I'm still trying to look for a place to live in Abercadene.
I haven't found one on the council yet even though there have been many properties on the council I still haven't found one but hopefully fingers crossed it won't be too much longer.
Four years.
Your independence and how was it kind of coming back to your family home?
Your family is your family you know you love them no matter what although I will say it was a bit of a shock for all of us because I had developed my own way of doing things and then also then of course because I moved back into my parents I pretty much had the contents of a flat in someone else's house.
My mum was like you can't bring all your stuff here I don't have the space you know yes you've got your flat but you can't so I had to limit what I was bringing with me and also the room I have at my home is a box room and I'm used to a double bedroom so the space issue there was was quite interesting but yeah I mean it has been stressful at times because mum isn't working because she's not able to work but she still does all her
stuff online so she does quite a lot of zoom meetings and things so that's interesting when you've got a three-way thing going quite often there's three of us on three different laptops
trying luckily now we have three headsets we didn't have three headsets at the time so somebody would always have to make sure they were well out of the way
so that they couldn't be heard in another room so we were having to try and make sure we were
because you couldn't be in the same room with three of you doing three different things of course then the internet would struggle so ultimately somebody would somebody's call would drop
so it was quite it was quite difficult now it's sort of settled down because dad is back at work
so for us the family dynamic has changed again because it's meant that it's made it easier
him being at work because he's quite him being at home was quite stressful because he's very set in
his ways he's very has to do things at a certain time in a certain way and the fact that even though I was living there
he in his head it's and yes I'm family but it's his house so therefore his priorities are the same mine and I'm like I get that but we need to kind of be a bit fair in the fact that I didn't ask for this to happen in the world nobody did but you know
yeah it's been it's been quite a shock but at the same time things have sort of settled back down again now that he is back at work and it makes it a lot easier
for me and mum because we are able to separate if we've got calls we're able to separate because
I haven't got dad on the big computer so yeah. And how about friendships then so I know you're really
busy part of lots of groups and things like that how maybe if we focus first on
the friends in groups and then those more sort of personal closer friendships
yeah I mean I'm lucky in a way that because of my job a lot of because of my
job I have now I before I was employed by them I was already friends with people that were that were
there before I became employed so I've been very lucky in the fact that we have zoom because that's
been zoom has been our main form of contact. Can you just explain what that job is then?
Just yeah so my job is I'm a sessional worker for building bridges so I work
with the young people and their families all the way from the age of eight right up to the age of
adult some people are on the project older than myself and so I'm basically my job is one that
if they need me to they'll they'll ask me if they need me to work so things I've done over the
lockdown are so I've done a tie-dye t-shirt video so I've uploaded about 15 16 different craft videos
I started one just as a bit of fun that took off and it was it was a thousand ways for toilet roll
tubes because at the start I made this joke that everybody's going to have a toilet roll tube
because there's none in the there's no toilet rolls in the shop and that was right at the start and
people thought it was hilarious so I was doing all these different craft things. Just very recently
we've had our first face-to-face activity that was a yoga session which was lovely we had it was a
very small number because a lot of people are actually too frightened to come out it's gone
the other way all these people that we encourage out of their houses have now gone completely
opposite way and so a lot of a lot 95 percent of the work I'm doing is online at the moment with
with that job so yeah in terms of friendship groups with with that it's been predominantly
through zoom or phone calls really but if it hadn't have been for the fact of the internet
we wouldn't be able to do what we I wouldn't be able to contact people in the way I have
it has proved it has proved challenging because some people don't like using the internet they
don't like it they're too frightened or they don't and we have you know and there have been
cases where people have not come on so that their communication is all over the phone or some people
are over email because they don't that's their form or texting is their form of communication so
it's an interesting it's interesting how do you find zoom in terms of maintaining contact with
people and like sort of front with friends and zooms great however it's only great if one of you
and your friendship group can afford to have paid for the premium because the problem is and
I mean me and the groups of people I talk to we can talk and so 40 minutes feels like 10 minutes
and it's gone and I'm like and I have to tell them I'm going it's counting down it's going to kick
us out and we can restart a meeting the meeting again but then you kind of lose the flow of where
you are so it kind of yeah I mean zoom has been really helpful and I've been lucky in that most
of my zoom calls with groups of people that I have been speaking to have been done through work so
therefore work have a premiums account so it's not quite as bad so we can just kind of set it up and
kind of go you know talk to we've we've had enough really so and so have you been able to use that
work kind of function for more personal connection not for personal I have my own zoom account but I
have the basics so I can I can contact somebody and do a 40 minute call if I wanted to but
nine times out of ten some of the times if I'm for closer friends it's whatsapp video calls
rather than zoom because you're it's unlimited then and it's on your phone because quite often
if I'm on the phone to a friend it might I might be outdoors in which I use my own wi-fi
and my own insets so then I can walk and talk and do things that way so yeah more often than not if
it's personal I don't zoom tends to be more work-based for me than personal but I have done one or
two like a friend of mine wanted to do a workout I mean I'm the last person that I yeah I'll dance
but um she wanted me to make up some kind of workout so I just stuck some music on and
moved about but we did that over zoom because the quality was better and because I had the laptop
it was easier but other than that I tend to use what uh whatsapp really for my video calls
so with um closer friends then also that more personal contact um are there lots of people
that you've been staying in touch with or is it just one or two friends or how's that been have
you and Emily been in touch? No this is the thing sadly as well as connecting me to my friends
I've also mine mine and Emily's friendship sadly has phased out to a point where we haven't been
in contact since well the last time I physically saw her face to face was probably it was the same
week we recorded with each other that was a lot yeah we haven't known yeah and it's not because
we haven't wanted to see each other it's you know how it is your life's change things move on you
don't always stay with the same person and I know Emily's been through a lot and things have happened
her life has changed and things like that because she's not been involved in our
Bridges stuff for quite some time now but
so you're still in contact really at all? Not really at all I do have her number and on you know
a while ago I was saying you know hi how are you but I wasn't getting any response and even
though I spoke to work in the work capacity to find out if everything was all right with her
um they just sort of said yeah as far as we're aware but I think it's just one of those
friendships change and your life changes and you move on and you lose friends and you make friends
and I think the pandemic has done exactly that for me it's brought me closer to people but it's also
took me away from people because I know that Emily wouldn't want to do zoom it's not that kind of
thing and I know that if I rang the conversation that we had would be very stop start because we've
disconnected now so we haven't had that reconnect properly and for us the reconnect would be
something face to face and it just it wouldn't at the moment in this moment in time it wouldn't
be right it wouldn't happen properly so for us it's kind of and sadly I mean as much as I've tried
to make contact she hasn't made contact with me either and I know it's difficult and I'm not
saying either of us are to blame for anything that's happened but you have to meet in you have
to meet in the middle somewhere and you know if neither of you are kind of communicating to each
other then it kind of spells that what you had was great but you've moved on and you know you have
to accept that and so at the moment we are I would pretty much say although Emily might have a
different view I'd still say she's a friend of mine because I know her but I haven't seen her
you know it's one of those that if I was to rock up to her house and say hello to her she'd
probably say hello but we wouldn't probably wouldn't hang out it's that kind of we're more
acquaintances now than we were friends so you said that in some ways it's brought you
you've connected better with some people during this yeah yeah about that then well my one of my
friends she lives in Derby and has done for the past sort of a year maybe two years and when the
lockdown hit we we've done a lot of video calls now because we used to do just you know just normal
phone calls but we like the fact that we could see each other and sort of talk that way so it's
brought us closer I mean we have seen each other face to face but that was just that was ages ago
before all the lockdown came in in to effect but we were lucky that we had the video call because
then we were able to sort of so it did bring us closer in that way because distance then was meant
nothing you know but then it's yeah and equally my other friend who we're even closer she only lives
well because I'm an avocadedy she lives in Monmouth and we still do video call I mean we have done I
have visited her outdoors and done the distance thing you know and it's been it's been great but
we've been she'll video call me or phone call me and even though we're only sort of a very
we're only like 20 minutes away just the fact that we're still able to video call each other
it's really helped it kind of it has kept the friendship going because I think
for us it was for me and my very close friend the one the one that lives in Monmouth, Sophie
the difference for us I guess is we were seeing each other four to five times a week
and then suddenly we were seeing each other once a month and for us that was a massive shock because
we're that I mean we're that close we can she considers me family and I consider her family
that's just how it is I mean we're not like they they'll ask and so oh yeah no she's you know it's
that kind of thing that I'm family is just expected I could go to her house not even knock the door
just walk in and make a competition oh hi how are you you know and it'd just be
for us I think because my other friend who lives in Derby we're used to the distance
whereas Sophie and I were not and so it was yeah because I was doing all I mean I do see her
I see her every day when I say that I mean when I do a dance classes they're on a Facebook live
so she can never see me or any of her members but I can see her so yes I'm seeing her but it's not
two-way like I can comment and I can type comments on the videos as they go in but it's not quite the
same as she's not able to talk she can talk back but she doesn't know necessarily that I'm talking
at the same time that makes sense because she'll read the comments but she'll read them after the
class because she can't do it at the same time but yeah it's been it it's been helpful to have
the internet and be able to communicate that way but it um yeah it's still a bit of a shock when
you realize how quick time goes till you see each other and we've been lucky and so far fingers
crossed we are still lucky in that we're still able to go to venues because I'll be seeing her in a bit
later on to do a class so face to face which is lovely because it isn't it's more attractive
because two-way then but yeah. How did you and Sophie get to know each other then and how long
have you known each other? So I Sophie and I have known each other for six years we've just had our
six years of friendship in April just gone and I I was incredibly lucky I met the only reason
I knew that Sophie even existed was the fact that her sister Rachel actually worked on the project
that I now work for that I'm now an employer for when I was a young person on the project
they um Rachel was a volunteer and she we'd gone I can't remember I was at some sort of activity
and at that point I wasn't great with with crowds of people and talking to people
and so I just kept myself to myself and she sort of came over and started talking to me
and asked how I was and I said yeah I'm good you know sort of side opening up and I thought
you know she you know she's come and sort of spoke to me and I thought we'll get on really well so
then after that aside I then said I was looking for a PA at the time and Rachel said oh I'd be
interested in doing some work for you so I said okay so we sort of went through all the legalities
you have to go through and all the formalities and stuff and we met we went out for um something to
eat and the drinking now because any she met me and I'm going to meet that I had no idea she had
she had a younger sister at all and we were just talking away and she said to me I have to you and
my younger sister have to meet and I said why is that because you're so like it's unreal it's like
you should have been it's like you should have been our third sister so it's the first time I've
met you but it's like we should have been because our sense of humour was the same what you what
annoys us is the same like we you know and um she'd shown me photos and things and that that was it
really and I commented I think on something on Facebook that Rachel had put up and I thanked her
for you know a nice nice time out and Sophie had seen the comment and said who is this person and
Rachel was like oh no Sophie's like have you just met them and she was like uh sorry
so have you known them for a long time she's like no I've just met her and Sophie was quite
taken aback because she was like oh it doesn't sound like it sounds like you're into the forever
and she was like no but that's just the kind of person she is she's very very friendly and you
know she I think you'd make good friends and that was it really um I for the first time ever had gone
out to the cinema with somebody that wasn't family my dad dropped me off in Raglan and Rachel and
Sophie met me and that was it it was in that moment in that car we've been we've been best friends and
ever since then that's how it's been you know we've been in the holidays together
So you've got a disability or autism?
Sophie is uh she's sight impaired she's registered blind and so um we I think the reason we got on
so so well is where I sometimes lack the sense of not necessarily danger but like sometimes my
my brain won't engage before I do something so like we could be out somewhere and I'll just be
like not not giving thought to much things whereas Sophie will so where where my brain
doesn't necessarily kick in Sophie helps me in that area whereas I then I then help her with
seeing things and you know she's very I will say one thing you would never know that she couldn't
see very well because I didn't even know in our friendship I had no idea until I think it was
about a month through months and a half into our friendship it must have been yeah it must have
been yeah good three weeks and it wasn't until she it wasn't until Sophie said it just never made
it never made a difference I think that's for us why it it has gone has kept we've kept it as close
as we haven't for as long as we have because it just it just it is what it is you know we
we get on with each other and yeah. So during this time you've been keeping in touch
kind of on zoom but a lot of that's based around so she's involved with Dance Blast is she
in your dance group? No Sophie Sophie's self-employed so Sophie actually runs
dance classes she's actually my dance instructor okay this is where it's really interesting because
I when I met Sophie Sophie wasn't self-employed at that time she was she well I said she wasn't
self-employed Sophie and Rachel started up RS dance so they they were doing dance but it was
Rachel's thing at the time so Rachel had trained to do some fitnessy stuff and then Rachel went on
then and decided she didn't want to do it anymore and so Sophie took it over and it was then when
Sophie was doing that that she'd said to me oh I'm thinking of becoming a fit steps instructor
I said well what's fit steps and she said well it's born with Latin she said you know strictly
come dancing and I said yeah I know a bit of it is that kind of dancing you wouldn't need a partner
she said I'm gonna so I think this summer coming I'm gonna learn to do it and I said all right and
that was she she'd learned to do it I think in the yeah she'd learned to do it over the summer
and then in the September so it literally was six months between me knowing Sophie to Sophie
becoming self-employed and becoming a fitness instructor there was a six month gap of me like
we'd only been friends six months then suddenly she becomes self-employed and achieved all of this
and I the nice thing was I'd seen it from from the box I'd seen it from the ground up so that was
what was was lovely about it but that's why it's an interesting spin on our friendship because those
I know that come to our classes know we're close friends but before that
like we'd be we'd be dancing or at the end like so could be like I've always said look if I'm
doing something that looks ridiculous tell me like show me how the arms went and because she's so
direct it we used to start and laugh out people would look at us as if she'd been really mean to
me but I was like no it's fine like we're really we're really close friends like we we banter all
the time and we have inside jokes and stuff like chatting about or what's happening well normally
we're just having a cup of tea and putting the world to rights or we're just like quite often
she'll ask me how I've how I found the classes online because it's really difficult for her to
gauge how members are you know if they're enjoying it if they're finding some of it too
too quick or too much because you can't really she can't see us to know how we're doing
so quite often like on one occasion she's like I was trying to try something I was like okay
and so she'd put music on and she'd have me do the dance because she knows if I'm able to do it then
then I you know then she's taught it right if I'm able to pick it up so she's done that a few times
all the odd times she's like I'll ask her questions about a line dance that she's done because
the tricky thing with line dancing is when you get to the back wall Sophie's behind you so you
can't see her you've got to listen but I've been lucky in that when it has been at venues I'm on
the back wall anyway so I've been used to having to listen because people are following me I somehow
got the honour of being asked within two or three weeks of being there if I'd go on the back wall
so it meant that I had to know what I was doing because people were copying me but no we just talk
about anything really and quite often 95 percent of the time we never we made a point of not talking
about the world as it is now we would just talk about happy things and we reminisce over memories
and things we have done and you know and even now we we reminisce over things we you know the funny
things that have gone on in lockdown and you know we just we try and every everything we have in our
conversation is always a positive not you know sometimes there are going to be conversations we
have where one of us is feeling a bit down or whatever that's natural but nine times out of
ten we do try and keep positive about it because we both believe that what you put out will come
back so we try and be as positive as we can be so yeah yeah we do talk about lots of things but
always positive if we can. How have you been kind of emotionally during this time what how have you
kind of felt? It's kind of sound really odd emotions wise I feel I've become attached and
detached at the same time with my emotions like I realized it wasn't until I mean it's it's now I
joke about it but I didn't at the time because I didn't realize until I think it probably about
May time May June time I realized it I'd seen somebody in the supermarket who I knew quite well
and I suddenly started having this real panic internally because I was like I've lost the
ability to communicate with somebody face to face I genuinely had this panic of please don't say
hello or do say hello but I don't know how what so they said hello and I just I went hi and that
was it and normally I'd be like hi how are you you know what we've been up to literally I managed
to get the words high out and I felt so embarrassed because they looked at me as if to say you're
going to say anymore and then before I knew it we'd gone our separate ways and we were
gone about the shopping but I was just like I realized I as well as the fact that
zoom and all this had brought me closer to people it almost took away my ability to communicate
face to face if that because although yes I'm face to face now because I'm talking to you and I can
see you it's not the same as if I was physically with somebody so the way I spent like I almost
made the anti-social because I was like I don't know like people say hello and I'm like I don't
know what to do with you like you're there but do I say hello what comes next almost like I've lost
it's almost as well as like the social cues are completely different when you're online to when
you're face to face like when you're online you can't talk at the same time so it's not natural
like you have to wait for somebody to stop talking to get your word in whereas when you're talking
face to face the natural thing is you'll talk at the same time and you might talk over people and
but it's fine because you know what it's been said because it can happen at the same time
so yeah emotions wise I've been I've been okay there have been moments where I've not been but
but
two minutes so yeah it's been no it's right it's been my emotions have been it's been tough in a way of
it's been tough in a way of
it's really difficult because I don't think I've allowed myself to fully grieve for the way things
have been just because I'm the kind of person that's like no I don't want to grieve I want
to be happy and I want to be I mean I have had a few people say to me how can you be like like
I've seen them in the street and now because of work I've been it it's gone the other way now I'm
okay I'm able to talk to people because I'm doing more face to face and things it's gotten better
but I have had the occasion where I'm like I've gone the other way so whereas I wouldn't say
a lot of people I'm like hi how are you and like really cheerful and I've had a few times when
they've gone we're going through a pandemic how can you be you're too happy how can you be so
happy and I was like I'd rather be happy than be miserable because being miserable doesn't make the
situation won't get any better if you know I might as well try and be happy and take every
positive I can out of the situation and I just smile at people and I'm like I feel I feel for
them because I think you must be really struggling and feel really sad and feel really alone
if you think I'm too happy because this is just this is me I haven't been any more happy than I
usually am so I'm like yeah it kind of opens your eyes really to the fact that I think people
are less inclined to say how they feel now more than ever because they don't want to burden an
already heavy world so they kind of and I'm like I wish you'd speak because actually speak there's
nothing wrong with saying I'm not okay there's nothing wrong with saying saying that at all and
I mean I've kind of come full circle emotion-wise because I kind of went from where I was really
panicked but well I was really laid back then I went to this panic phase and I went through this
manic OCD phase as well that phase kind of gave me my hands were literally red raw I burnt my
hands pretty much because I was washing them that much and the taps were that I had the taps that
hot and I was like you've burnt your hands and I said yeah but I need to wash them in a little
shorter point where I was washing them 20 30 times a day it was that bad at one point because
I was so panicked by the fact that everywhere you went it was a you must wash your hands and
it was really in your face so I was and then it kind of I still wash my hands but not I wash them
more than I should more than needs me but not as bad as I was and then communications gotten
better I've sort of relaxed a little bit and not got as panicked as I was and then I've tried to
help other people not be as panicked because my my work has almost helped in a way of I I'm in a
position with work where not that it's expected of me to cope but like I don't want others to feel
anxious because I'm anxious so I kind of try and find the positives and you know so yeah emotion
wise it's been it's been tough at times and it still is now and again I get moments where I'm like
you know can you know like I've learned now I'm living day to day and I know I'm already thinking
in my head I can see my phone I'm already thinking at half past one between half past one half past
two if the government hasn't said there are any restrictions I can go to a dance class tomorrow
because I've got to give you 24 hours notice so I'm still I'm still controlling in a way of like I
know exactly when the government posts out about restrictions because I've seen the times they get
posted but that's my own thing but other than that emotion wise I'm in a good place now
and I'm quite positive I'm quite happy and I'm quite I'm quite okay with the way things are but
the happy times where it's been really like there were times where because I was so unsure of the
world and so anxious and so kind of my emotions were really confused I was actually lashing out
with people and it was always those that were the closest to me and wanted to help me and wanted me
to be happy that I was doing that too and then I'd do it and then get really upset that I'd done
it but I wasn't that wasn't the emotion I wasn't angry I was confused and lost and didn't know where
I stood but it came out as anger and that's not yeah but I guess you know we all go through the
emotions and I've come the other side now and it is it's one of those it's coming the other side
now but I don't know how long it'll be before it kind of goes round again so I have to wait and see
Do you have have you been able to talk to people have there been people that you've been able to
you know share the way you've been feeling with during this time?
Yeah I'm lucky in a way that mum and dad are quite open and will let me talk but obviously
you never really want to burden your parents but they I do talk to them and we do have conversations
and we're quite open about it but I'm also lucky that my closest friends are a great outlet for me
as well as they as I am for them you know quite often they'll go it's so unfair and like it
sometimes for me it's it's the need to decompress at the end of the day like because there's so much
going on there's so much uncertainty and there's where as my anxiety would come and go there's a
steady anxiety now whereas I'd have moments where I'd almost be free of anxiety because I'd be like
oh you know this is how life is like excuse me pre-Covid I was I had I didn't always have anxiety
I would just have it now you know now and again whereas now there's always there's a there's an
anxiety that there's always like a baseline and then it either go up or it'll go down it'll never
stop and I think it's just because I the world isn't predictable like it used to be people aren't
predictable like they used to be all that predictability has been taken away so therefore
I have nothing to base anything on you know I just I'm just having to literally go oh well
this is what's happened here and now I can't base anything on anything you know and I can't look at
people and know their emotion because quite often that's not their true emotion because nobody wants
to burden anybody else so whilst I'm trying to understand people and work it out because nobody's
being as definitive with their emotions like they're happy they're happy you know you know
whereas actually now people are happy but they're that that's not their emotion if you see what I
mean it's like people will be like oh yes I'm really happy yeah it's really difficult to
to know and more so than ever because now you've got to wear a face mask indoors I can't tell by
somebody just by looking at them what they're feeling and whether
my because I don't know whether what I've said has offended them or whether they're happy or
whether they're you know how they're feeling because I can't tell just by their eyes alone
I mean I'm lucky in that some people that I do know they have got a degree in drama and theatre
and stuff like that so actually it's boded well because they can tell me through their eyes because
they they go over the top which works really well like I know if they're if they're bored
because they'll show me but yeah. And what about kind of work colleagues have you had support
through work or how has that been? Yeah absolutely I mean work on many levels has saved me
because they're always there for me they were on occasion they've asked me to do videos they've
always said if they've asked me to do a video they've said if you don't want to do it you don't
have to do it like there's no pressure to do anything and it is great I mean I've got
fingers crossed Sunday next Sunday Sunday the fourth supposed to be going on an outdoor
distance bike ride and picnic with QB which is the younger which is Quest Busters they're the younger
group they're eight to seventeen so I've been asked if I'll go there and say hi to the families
and just make myself known because a lot of the families don't know who I am because a lot of
them have only seen me over like a zoom call or something like I haven't really seen you face to
face but no I am so so lucky in the fact that my um my what you call it my line manager so to say
although we don't really use that word we just my um my point of contact is is Lisa and the great
thing about it is that a with children knows me really well and b I can ring her and just be like
this is going on and she'll be like it's fine we'll work through it so I as well as the fact that
I'm employed by them they're also very very aware that this time although it's
an anxiety broken time for many it's more so for something like me so they're very aware of that
and they'll always say like they'll ring in and check in on me or they'll send me a message say
how are you doing today you know how's it going and they've always said never be afraid to tell
us that you're having a hard time because that's when you need us most so just just tell us if
you're having a difficult time or if things are too much or if you're worried should not know and
should not know questions a silly question I'd rather you ask and then be able to tell you then
not know so yeah work's really really helped me to even to have employment in this house
think if I had no employment during this time I think I'd be lost because although dance is an
outlet I like having different people to talk to different faces and different things to do
so yes they've really helped and one of the things that we um chatted about last week was
about um sort of studio with dance and sort of physical contact is that something you've missed
physical absolutely 100% I mean with dancing at the moment when you're in venues it's okay with
like Sophie's classes with Zumba and fit steps because you're not it's not contact anyway you're
just copying something but with my contemporary classes everything is contact based and we've
been told obviously none of what we do is to be caught so we're having to do things separate but
together but it it works but for me I'm such a contact person and we had to do a task for
when we went into our venue and that was to do she said oh there's three things in the room have a
look you know take any three things in your room describe them so I described them you know one
word for each thing in the room and then you had to do you had to translate that into a dance move
to three dances and put them together every single person that was on that zoom meeting
and in that room had a move that connected with themselves physically and it just it
everybody realized when the videos were played back as we recorded it they said
doesn't that just go to show how much people are missing physical contact with another person and
I said well I didn't at first I didn't give a thought to it but it it really is I said to
people I said the thing with me is if I know you really really well like if you've your friends or
whatever my immediate thing is for hi how are you and to hug you that is my immediate response
and to not be able to do that I'm like it is really difficult because then I'm like
is there going to be a time where they go hugging is okay or is this it now we've lost the ability
to be able to hug each other period you know and in my head I'm like please tell me there comes a
point where they go it's safe you can hug somebody because I'm like I think god what's it being now
six months over six months you know and I mean yes I've hugged my mum and my dad but that's been it
I mean I haven't I haven't hugged my that's where I hugged my best friend was right at the start of
March so it's been six months and we all the time we're always high-fiving and hugging each other
and to not be able to do that we just we ear hug now we're like ear hug that's all you can do like
a thing but yeah it's strange it's strange to dance but not not do the contact bit when it's
contemporary but yeah it works we've made it work I know um back when we did the interview with you
and Emily you were single um are you you're not in a relationship at the moment absolutely not
that is the last of my things and to be quite honest I said this to somebody the other day
I don't know if I ever want to be in a relationship I quite like me myself and I know it sounds really
vain it's not that I I just I find guys really I know guys say we're confusing but I find them
really confusing people because they they they think they think they're after simplicity they
want a simple life yeah they're the ones that confuse everything like I'm just like I don't
understand guys I just I understand obviously I understand but I mean like I just my life without
a guy I just it sounds awful but I don't have time to put a man in my relation within my world
because to me then I have to make time for that person and it sounds strange because yes I make
time for my friends but that's natural that's been six years it's a natural thing whereas
a relationship with a guy is the most unnatural thing in the world to me so I don't know if I
ever will have a relationship or whether I will have children of my own but I'm quite happy with
that at the moment like I don't I don't like my best friend Nathalie because she's in a relationship
has been for a little while now well coming up for a year I think um yeah yeah and she's asked me
before now you know she's asked me much longer how do you feel about it and I said to be honest
I said I don't think I want a guy I said I don't know if I ever want to have a man I said because
in a strange way I said minus the children and things like that I said everything I want in the
guy she already gives me just not in a deep and emotional way if that makes sense like she gives
me the friendship she gives me the banter she gives me the closeness you know I don't
there's nothing that a guy would give me extra other than a children and be the emotional and
sexual side of things she you know Sophie gives me everything else why would I then want to add a man
into something that's already great like I don't yeah I don't know do you know you're not tempted
by the emotional and sexual side of things then it's not something that you feel no not really
I know well no because people go to me oh you don't know what you're missing and I'm like well
that's like saying to somebody who can never eat ice cream always allergic to chocolate you don't
know what you're missing if you've never had it you're never going to know and they laugh I'm like
well if I've never been there and done it you're right I don't know what I'm missing so as much as
you keep saying you don't know what you're missing you're quite right I don't know what I'm missing
you feel okay with that absolutely I've never felt more free I'm not tied down to anything
I don't have to go home and answer to anybody I don't have to go go home and cook for a guy
I'm not saying every guy you know every woman cooks for a man but like I don't have to go home
and think about someone else it's not my mum my dad my brother you know I don't have to go and go
oh okay maybe I should contact you or you know maybe I should meet up with you there's none of
that I don't have to you know it's all yeah I don't know I've tried relationships a few times
and they've just they've just not worked for me fair enough so yeah so it's not like you've been
kind of during this period um thinking about relationships or no because I've not been I've
not truly been lonely funnily enough not even like it's strange because you think I feel more
lonely because I'm not I'm seeing less of people but I feel I feel more connected to people now
than I did once didn't have any friends um when we were able to go and just go and hug somebody
and say hello now I feel more connected with the world than I've ever been and whether it's because
I've realised how lucky I am because I've been at that place where I've had nothing and now I have
everything and whether I've whether it's because it's all coming to perspective and I'm thinking
oh actually I have it pretty good right now you know I didn't have it good I have it pretty good
right now even though even though I'm seeing less of people I'm still I still have it good I could
have been in a way worse position you know so yeah. So finally in terms of like the um the practical
sides of all of these things like with all the rules and everything like that how have you found
kind of making sense of of some of that side of things? Well I um for me the rules have always
been they contradict every rule not every rule but most rules they make contradict themselves
because it's like you say one thing but you like I can't wrap my head around I understand
the economy is important but so are people you know people are more so important than
the economy but I know why they're doing things but they're saying you you know if you've got
restrictions you can't meet people any more than six people at a go um I'm sorry if you've got
restrictions you can't meet anybody you don't live with but yeah I can go down the local pub
as long as I'm out by 10 and I'm like I don't understand the logic I understand they're trying
to keep the economy going and they want people to because what they're saying is we want people to
have that we want people to go to these places because people's mental health is suffering
because they're staying indoors I get that but by saying don't go and have people in your house that
you don't live with you're not eliminating the problem because the problem doesn't stem from
households the problem stems from people going into pubs and restaurants I said if you'd have
just kept it outdoors I know it's freezing cold now but even if you'd if people really wanted a
drink they'd wrap up you'd wear warm clothes you know if you really wanted to I mean I've not been
in the first time I went in a restaurant was in Temby just um just gone yesterday and what day
we'd say Monday not yesterday Saturday and I was petrified I'd never eaten I almost didn't digest
my food um and almost bought it straight back up because I was that anxious I was eating it that
quick because I wanted to get my face mask on because I was so petrified I said to mum what if
we go home and they tell us I've been in contact with someone they said that's 14 days I've got to
not leave this house I said I can't do that I mean I would have to but like the the anxiety of being
forced to stay in in your own four walls for for however many days was like but no the rules are
really I mean I have been lucky in a way and I know this person won't mind me mentioning
I've been so so lucky that Gwen and I have kept contact the way we have just through messages
literally as soon as there's an update even if it doesn't relate to me Gwen literally my phone will
go and I'll be like I can see it on the computer and I'm like any minute now and like it happens I
always get one and Gwen's like you don't need to worry this is what it means and it's great
because I don't I don't listen to any of the conferences because there's too much information
given out at the same time whereas Gwen will listen to all the conferences but will only tell
me things that will affect me whereas if it's not relevant to me she won't tell me because she's like
there's no need for me to tell you something that doesn't involve you so if it involves you
I'll tell you so it's great because then I'm literally Gwen's now become my little messenger
of all things role related because then I'm like I don't need to worry no Gwen's like no you're
fine you're good this is what you need to do to make sure you're you're safe and that's it you
know so I'm I am really lucky. How do you think other people have managed with that side of things?
I think other people have struggled because I think not everybody has I mean even my parents
don't understand it they're like have you got a Gwen update yet because they wait for me to
like it's become a thing in our house they're like oh is there a Gwen update and I'm like and she knows
she thinks it's the sweetest thing ever and I'm like no no Gwen update yet and then I'm like oh
mum we've had an update because they mum and dad don't even watch the telling out to the news
because it's too confusing mum's like I don't understand what applies to us and what applies
to us and what doesn't so but I think for other people particularly those in my position those
with a learning disability that works with any additional need I think it's increasingly because
nothing is easy read sit there and listen is is really hard because you don't and the big fancy
words and you know and I'm like just tell me you know what what is it exactly that I need to do
to make sure that I'm sticking with the rules here you know and and then I think
people like me are very easily drawn into the fact that yes I've got social media but social media
couldn't be a negative thing in a situation like this because I have seen so many people that have
gone oh how ridiculous is this and they're venting out things out but they don't realize that by
venting and trying to make justification of a rule that's been that's been put there anybody else
seen that they you know for the likes of me I'm like I don't know why you're trying the rules there
the rules there don't try and make sense of it because you won't make sense of it none of it
makes sense I don't even think those that made the rules fully understand what sense can make
sense and if you've asked them and said where's the common sense in it they wouldn't be able to
tell you because they're trying at the same time people don't realize yeah okay you know I'm not
pinning blame on anybody but you've got to realize they're learning at the same time people that are
governing the world have never had to govern it in quite the way they are now you know so I'm just
it makes me laugh people go oh what's the point it's ridiculous I might as well go down the
pub and get plastered and I'm like get down the pub and get plastered everyone they haven't stopped
you what they're saying is on your head be it you know ideally don't go you know they're not you
know that's what they're saying in the grand scheme of things don't go to these places I mean
I haven't been to a pub since I think it's February last I went to a pub February
um and I don't intend going anytime soon I mean we're supposed to go with my best friend
was to go to Cardiff on the 10th of October but that's not happening I mean if I'm honest I don't
I still it baffles me how mom should have kept their head above water so yeah so far where's
the word yes there because I think you know I'm waiting it's only a matter of time I think it's
not a matter of when it's it's not a matter of if it's a matter of when but you know just see
what happens and go from there really take it day by day it's all you can do is there anything else
that you would want to say about I guess the past few months that you would want people to know about
you know your experiences over the past few months I think the main thing I want people to
take from this or those that are listening to this is you know whether that be now whether this
be in years to come although it's been a tough time it's never not been all negative there have
been positives we are we will get through this you know yes we're writing history at the moment
this is you know a big part of history in the making but there are positive communities are
coming together people are things are moving along you know it's not been it's never been
a case of it's going to end the world it isn't yes it's changed but I just want people to know
it's not forever although it feels like it now and it's difficult nothing nothing is nothing is
forever you know and tomorrow's never tomorrow's never promised you never promise tomorrow just
take it day by day and go I got up this morning great you know that's in itself you know is a
massive thing don't think you know I see people now that go oh god what's gonna happen what's
gonna happen next week what's gonna happen you know in my head it's like what's gonna happen
tomorrow you know I don't go as far ahead as to all I know now is I'm able to go and do a dance
class today great I don't know if I'll be able to go and do one tomorrow whether it'll be on
zoom I'll cross that bridge when it comes to it but just just take day by day and make the most
make the most of it fine because I always say to people not every day is a good day but there's
good in every day and even if it means that you write one thing down it might be something like
you know you're really proud of some uh a meal that you made today or you're really proud of
the fact that you went to the shop and you got something write that down and then come the new
year you can see every all the things you achieved in the year that's just gone because it it's
really helpful for people to see that things can still be achieved and it's the small things people
take for granted that now are the huge things because people go oh yeah uh you know I've made
that you might not think twice about something that you've cooked but now the fact that you went
out and got the stuff and you came back and you cooked it's a huge thing because you've been out
to the shops where you may not have felt safe you've come back you've cooked something you know
you've put something on the table it's all about the small things now are what are what have now
become the big things and take nothing take nothing for granted because you do not know when
that will be the last of something you know just take every moment take you know tell those that
I've processed you tell them tell them you love them tell them how important and how much they
appreciate you because you don't know when that's going to be the last time you're going to be able
to do that so just take every day as it comes tell people you love them and just enjoy and be in the
moment be in the here and the now don't worry about tomorrow tomorrow will be what will be will be
just being here in the now you know and that's all I can say to people you know just enjoy
what you have don't worry about what you don't have because you can't change that just enjoy
what you have and what you could have so yeah great thank you Sami I'm gonna stop record